                  Freeciv Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

                 (from http://www.freeciv.org/wiki/FAQ)

   Contents

        1 Gameplay
             1.1 OK, so I installed Freeciv. How do I play?
             1.2 How do I play multiplayer?
             1.3 Where is the chatline you are talking about, how do I
               chat?
             1.4 Why can't I attack another player's units?
             1.5 How do I declare war on another player?
             1.6 How do I do diplomatic meetings?
             1.7 How do I trade money with other players?
             1.8 How can I change the way a Freeciv game is ended?
             1.9 My irrigated grassland produces only 2 food. Is this a
               bug?
             1.10 How do I play against computer players?
             1.11 Can I build up the palace or throne room as in the
               commercial Civilization games?
             1.12 Can I build land over sea/transform ocean to land?
             1.13 Can I change settings or rules to get different types of
               games?
             1.14 How compatible is Freeciv with the commercial
               Civilization games?
             1.15 My opponents seem to be able to play two moves at once!
             1.16 I am far superior to my opponent but his last city is on
               a 1x1 island so I cannot conquer it, and he won't give up.
               What can I do?
             1.17 Why are the AI players so hard on 'novice' or 'easy'?
             1.18 Why are the AI players so easy on 'hard'?
             1.19 What distinguishes AI players from humans? What do the
               skill levels mean?
             1.20 How do I play on a hexagonal grid?
             1.21 How do I create teams of AI or human players?
             1.22 I want more action.
             1.23 I can't see trade routes in the city dialog (GTK+)
        2 Community
             2.1 Does Freeciv violate any rights of the makers of
               Civilization I or II?
             2.2 How do I wake up in the morning?
             2.3 Where can I ask questions or send improvements?
        3 Technical Stuff
             3.1 I've found a bug, what should I do ?
             3.2 I've started a server but the client cannot find it!
             3.3 I can play on my own server, but the metaserver doesn't
               seem to work.
             3.4 How do I change the metaserver info string?
             3.5 Am I using the latest version? Do I need to upgrade?
             3.6 "cannot open display :0"
             3.7 HOME directory not set?
             3.8 How do I start the next game?
             3.9 How do I restart a saved game?
             3.10 The server cannot save games!
             3.11 Where are the save games located by default?
             3.12 Why are some of the menus in the Freeciv client disabled?
             3.13 How do I find out about the available units,
               improvements, terrain types, and technologies?
             3.14 My diagonal arrow keys do not work on Solaris.
             3.15 The client complains it can't read the
               .freeciv-client-rc-x.x file.
             3.16 My Freeciv client dumps core when I start it!
             3.17 Freeciv fails to compile due to the Xaw libraries.
             3.18 How do I compile Freeciv under Solaris?
             3.19 How do I compile Freeciv under Solaris or FreeBSD?
             3.20 I hate isometric view! How do I play with Civilization I
               style graphics?
             3.21 What other GUI options do I have for the Freeciv client?
             3.22 How do I enable/disable sound support?
             3.23 Where can I find more information on the *.ruleset files?
             3.24 How can I add additional civilizations in the nation/
               subdirectory, or add cities to the list for an existing
               nation?
             3.25 How do I change the font?
             3.26 I am having problems with accented characters. What
               gives?
             3.27 How can i change the language of my client/server?
             3.28 How do I get the latest development code?
             3.29 How do I disable full screen mode?
             3.30 What are the system requirements ?
                  3.30.1 Memory
                  3.30.2 Processor
                  3.30.3 Graphic display
                  3.30.4 Network
        4 Windows
             4.1 How do I use Freeciv under MS Windows ?
             4.2 Retrieving the Native Windows Freeciv
             4.3 OK, I've downloaded and installed it, how do I run it?
             4.4 I've started the Freeciv client, but don't know what to do
               next?
             4.5 How do I use a different tileset?
             4.6 How do I use a different ruleset?
             4.7 I opened a ruleset file in Notepad and it is very hard to
               read
        5 Mac OS X
             5.1 How do I install the latest version of Freeciv or compile
               it myself?
             5.2 Where is the data directory?
             5.3 How do I install X11?
             5.4 How do I troubleshoot Freeciv crashes?
             5.5 Freeciv crashes because it doesn't find libXinerama
               something?
             5.6 How do I install new tilesets?
             5.7 How do I scroll the map?
             5.8 Freeciv won't start on my machine

-------

1 Gameplay

-------

1.1 OK, so I installed Freeciv. How do I play?

   Freeciv is a client/server system. But in most cases you don't have to
   worry about this; the server is run automatically for you when you
   start a new game. So unless you're using one of the older Freeciv
   client programs all you have to do is run the client. Do this by
   double-clicking on the freeciv-gtk2 executable program or by typing
   freeciv-gtk2 in a terminal (in the case of the gtk2 client).

   Once the client starts, select start new game. Now edit your game
   settings (the defaults should be fine for a beginner-level
   single-player game) and press the start button.

   Once the game is started you can find information in its Help menu. If
   you've never played a Civilization-style game before you may want to
   look at the help on Strategy and tactics.

   You can continue to change the game settings through the Remote Server
   menu item in the Options submenu of the Game menu. Type /help in the
   chatline (or server command line) to get more information about server
   commands.

   Detailed explanations of how to play Freeciv are also in the
   ./doc/README file distributed with the source code, and in the online
   manual available on this site. The manual covers both the client and
   the server and is available in several different versions for various
   major Freeciv releases.

-------

1.2 How do I play multiplayer?

   There are two sorts of multiplayer games to play: local games and
   global games. The below directions are for the gtk client. Other
   clients behave similarly.

   To play a local game, simply start up a new game the way you normally
   would. When you get to the pre-game screen hold on and wait for other
   players to connect. Now your fellow players (on the same LAN) should
   launch their clients, choose Connect to Network Game and then Local
   Area Network. You should see the existing server listed; double-click
   on it to join.

   To play a global game, you do not start the game yourself but connect
   to a server already running on the internet. Choose Connect to Network
   Game and then Internet Metaserver. A list of active servers should come
   up; double-click one to join it.

   You can also choose to directly connect to a specific server, provided
   you know the IP address and port of the server you're connecting to.
   This server will then show up under Local Area Network. You may want to
   start up the server by hand (with freeciv-server in a terminal or by
   double-clicking on the executable) and connect to it directly from all
   clients. You may also start up the server with the -m command-line
   option to make it report to the Metaserver and allow other players to
   connect to it through the Internet Metaserver tab.

-------

1.3 Where is the chatline you are talking about, how do I chat?

   The chatline is located at the bottom of the window. Sometimes you have
   to activate a Chat tab to see it.

   In SDL Freeciv you have to press Tab to access the chatline.

   The chatline can be used for normal chatting or for issuing server
   commands by typing a forward-slash '/' followed by the server command.

-------

1.4 Why can't I attack another player's units?

   You have to declare war first. See section for How do I declare war on
   another player below.

   (As a note, you start out at war with all players, but you are always
   offered a cease-fire treaty upon first contact which if accepted has to
   be broken before you can attack the player's units or cities.)

-------

1.5 How do I declare war on another player?

   Go to the Nations report, select the player, then choose Cancel Treaty
   from the bottom-located Diplomacy menu. This drops you from "cease
   fire" or "armistice" into "war". If you've already signed a permanent
   treaty with the player you may have to do it more than once.

-------

1.6 How do I do diplomatic meetings?

   Go to the Nations report, select a player, then choose Meet from the
   bottom-located Diplomacy menu. But remember that you have to either
   have contact with the player or an embassy established in one of their
   cities.

-------

1.7 How do I trade money with other players?

   If you want to make a monetary exchange, first initiate a diplomatic
   meeting as described in the section about How do I do diplomatic
   meetings above. In the diplomacy dialog, enter the amount you wish to
   give in the gold input field on your side or the amount you wish to
   receive in the gold input field on their side. With the focus in either
   input field, press Enter to insert the clause into the treaty.

-------

1.8 How can I change the way a Freeciv game is ended?

   A standard Freeciv game ends when only one player/team is left alive,
   when a player's spaceship arrives at Alpha Centauri, or when you reach
   the ending turn - whichever comes first.

   You can change the default ending turn by changing the endturn setting.
   You can do this through Remote Server (see article on Server options)
   under the Options menu item in the Game menu or by typing into the
   chatline something like:
/set endturn 300

   You can end a running game immediately with:
/endgame

   For more information, try:
/help endgame

   If you want to avoid the game ending by space race, you can change the
   spacerace setting - again either through the Server Options dialog or
   through the chatline by:
/set spacerace 0

   You cannot change the conquest victory condition. A player who defeats
   all enemies will always win the game.

-------

1.9 My irrigated grassland produces only 2 food. Is this a bug?

   No, it isn't. It's a feature. Your government is probably despotism,
   which has a -1 output whenever a tile produces more than 2 units of
   food/production/trade. You should change your government (See
   Government) to get rid of this penalty.

-------

1.10 How do I play against computer players?

   See also the How do I create teams of AI or human players? section
   below.

   In most cases when you start a single-player game you can change the
   number of players, and their difficulty, directly through the
   spinbutton. Note the number of players here includes human players (an
   aifill of 5 adds AI players until the total number of players becomes
   5).

   If you are playing on a remote server, you'll have to do this manually.
   Change the aifill server option through the Remote Server options
   dialog, or do it on the chatline with something like:
/set aifill 30

   Difficulty levels are set with the /hard, /normal, /easy, and /novice
   commands.

   You may also create AI players individually. For instance, to create
   one hard and one easy AI player, enter:
/create ai1
/hard ai1
/create ai2
/easy ai2
/list

   More details are in the ./doc/README file supplied with Freeciv and the
   online manual on this site.

-------

1.11 Can I build up the palace or throne room as in the commercial Civilization
games?

   No. This feature is not present in Freeciv, and will not be until
   someone draws the graphics for it.

-------

1.12 Can I build land over sea/transform ocean to land?

   Yes. You can do that by placing engineer units on a transport and going
   to the ocean tile you want to build land on (this must be in a land
   corner). Click the transport to display a list of the transported
   engineers and activate them. Then give them the order of transforming
   this tile to swamp. This will take a very long time though, so you'd
   better try with 6 engineers at a time.

-------

1.13 Can I change settings or rules to get different types of games?

   Of course.

   Before the game is started, you may change settings through the server
   options dialog (available in the pregame screen). You may also change
   these settings or use server commands through the chatline. If you use
   the chatline, use the
/show

   command to display the most commonly-changed settings (see article on
   show), or
/help <setting>

   to get help on a particular setting, or
/set <setting> <value>

   to change a setting to a particular value (see article on set). After
   the game begins you may still change some settings (but not others).

   World maps can be created using the built-in map editor. It is also
   possible to edit running games: Just enable Editing Mode from the Edit
   menu. (You may also unzip and edit any savegame with a text editor, if
   you're ambitious).

   You can create rulesets or "modpacks" - alternative sets of units,
   buildings, and technologies. Several different rulesets come with the
   Freeciv distribution, including a civ1 (Civilization 1 compatibility
   mode), and civ2 (Civilization 2 compatibility mode). Use the rulesetdir
   command (see rulesetdir) to change the ruleset (as in /rulesetdir
   civ2). Note the ruleset mechanism is still being refined from version
   to version. In the GTK2 client you are able to choose the ruleset from
   a dropdown on the pregame screen.

   Finally, upgrade! Freeciv continues to improve from version to version:
   a rule may change when the mailing list agrees it is 'wrong'. See, for
   instance, the NEWS.

-------

1.14 How compatible is Freeciv with the commercial Civilization games?

   Freeciv was created as a multiplayer version of Civilization™ with
   players moving simultaneously. Rules and elements of Civilization II,
   and features required for single-player use, such as AI players, were
   added later. It is still a stated goal to let Freeciv's game engine be
   100% compatible with Civilization™ I and II, but only as an option.

   This is why Freeciv comes with three game configurations (rulesets):
   the civ1 and civ2 modpacks implement game rules, elements and features
   that bring it as close as possible to Civilization I and Civilization
   II respectively, while the default modpack tries to reflect the most
   popular settings among Freeciv players. Unimplemented Civilization I
   and II features are mainly those that would have little or no benefit
   in multiplayer mode, and nobody is working on closing this gap.

   Little or no work is being done on implementing features from other
   similar games, such as SMAC, CTP or Civilization III.

   So the goal of compatibility is mainly used as a limiting factor in
   development: When a new feature is added to Freeciv that makes gameplay
   different, it is always implemented in such a way that the
   "traditional" behaviour remains available as an option.

   See also Projects.

-------

1.15 My opponents seem to be able to play two moves at once!

   Freeciv's multiplayer facilities are asynchronous: during a turn, moves
   from connected clients are processed in the order they are received.
   Server managed movement is executed in between turns. This allows human
   players to surprise their opponents by clever use of goto or quick
   fingers.

   In Freeciv 2.2 an alternating movement server option (phasemode) is
   available, in which only one player can move their units at a time.

-------

1.16 I am far superior to my opponent but his last city is on a 1x1 island so I
cannot conquer it, and he won't give up. What can I do?

   Research 'amphibious warfare', build a marine, and get him.
   Alternatively research 'combined arms' and either move a helicopter or
   airdrop a paratroopers unit there.

   If you can't build marines yet, but you do have engineers, and other
   land is close-by, you can also build a land-bridge to the island (i.e.
   transform the ocean).

-------

1.17 Why are the AI players so hard on 'novice' or 'easy'?

   You are not expanding fast enough. Read the How to Play article for
   some general tips how to get a head start in the game.

   Learn more at the Freeciv Forums.

   You can also turn off Fog of War. That way, you will see the attacks of
   the AI. Just type /set fogofwar 0' on the chat line before the game
   starts.

-------

1.18 Why are the AI players so easy on 'hard'?

   Several reasons. For example, the AI is heavily playtested under and
   customized to the default ruleset and server settings. Although there
   are several provisions in the code to adapt to changing rules, playing
   under different conditions is quite a handicap for it. Though mostly
   the AI simply doesn't have a good, all encompassing strategy besides
   "eliminate nation x". For further details, see the article on AI.

   To make the game harder, you could try putting some or all of the AI
   into a team. This will ensure that they will waste no time and
   resources negotiating with each other and spend them trying to
   eliminate you. They will also help each other by trading techs. You can
   use the team command to set teams before the game starts. For AI teams
   you have to create the AI players first using the create command. For
   example
/create ai1
/create ai2
/team ai1 "Team 2"
/team ai2 "Team 2"

   You can also form more than one AI teams by using any of the different
   predefined team names, or put some AI players teamed with you.

-------

1.19 What distinguishes AI players from humans? What do the skill levels mean?

   AI players in Freeciv operate in the server, partly before all clients
   move, partly afterwards. Unlike the clients, they can observe the full
   state of the game, including everything about other players.
   Additionally, Hard AI players can see every game unit even through fog
   of war.

   AI players can change production without penalty and switch governments
   without going through anarchy. Additionally, Hard AI players can set
   their research, tax or luxury to 100% regardless of their governments.

   Other than this, the AI players are not known to cheat, except when on
   Cheating skill level.

   Further, the Novice and Easy AI are less eager to build cities, and at
   Novice, Easy and Normal, the AI 'forgets' where huts are and cannot
   plan attacks against enemy units they shouldn't be aware of.

-------

1.20 How do I play on a hexagonal grid?

   It is possible to play with hexagonal instead of rectangular tiles. To
   do this you need to set your topology before the game starts
/set topology 13

   and switch to a isometric hexagonal tileset (isophex is included with
   the game). Note if you do it wrong, you may end up playing with a
   rectangular tileset on a "true" hexagonal grid or to play with a
   hexagonal tileset on a rectangular grid - this is probably not what you
   want.

   You may also play with overhead hexagonal, in which case you want to
   set the topology index to 9 and use the hex2t tileset.

   If you start a new game the grid (topology) will automatically be set
   to match your tileset. However since you can't change the tileset in
   pre-game this may not be helpful. You can try running the client as
freeciv-gtk2 -t isophex

   or
freeciv-gtk2 -t hex2t

   to set the tileset immediately on startup. (This assumes that you are
   using the gtk2 client.)

-------

1.21 How do I create teams of AI or human players?

   See also the How do I play against computer players? section.

   The GTK2 client has a GUI for setting up teams - just right click on
   any player and assign it to any team. You may also use the command-line
   interface (through the chatline.)

   First of all try the /list command. This will show you all players
   created, including human players and created AI players. To assign AI
   players to teams you have to create them first, as in /create ai1 to
   create an AI player named "ai1".

   Now, you're ready to assign players to teams. To do this you use the
   team command. For example, to create two AI players and put them on the
   same team you can do
/create ai1
/create ai2
/team ai1 "Team 2"
/team ai2 "Team 2"

   You may also assign teams for human players, of course. If in doubt use
   the /list command again; it will show you the name of the team each
   player is on. Make sure you double-check the teams before starting the
   game; you can't change teams after the game has started.

-------

1.22 I want more action.

   In Freeciv, expansion is everything, even more so than in the
   single-player commercial Civilization games. Some players find it very
   tedious to build on an empire for hours and hours without even meeting
   an enemy.

   There are various techniques to speed up the game. The best idea is to
   reduce the time and space allowed for expansion as much as possible.
   One idea for multiplayer mode is to add AI players: they reduce the
   space per player further, and you can toy around with them early on
   without other humans being aware of it. This only works after you can
   beat the AI, of course.

   Another idea is to create starting situations in which the players are
   already fully developed. There is no automated support for this yet,
   but you can create populated maps with the built-in editor.

-------

1.23 I can't see trade routes in the city dialog (GTK+)

   In the GTK2 client, you can see the effect of trade routes by left
   clicking and holding on the trade value in the Info panel of the city
   dialog.

-------

2 Community

-------

2.1 Does Freeciv violate any rights of the makers of Civilization I or II?

   There have been debates on this in the past and the honest answer seems
   to be: We don't know.

   Freeciv doesn't contain any actual material from the commercial
   Civilization games. (The Freeciv maintainers have always been very
   strict in ensuring that materials contributed to the Freeciv
   distribution or website do not violate anyone's copyright.) The name of
   Freeciv is probably not a trademark infringement. The user interface is
   similar, but with many (deliberate) differences. The game itself can be
   configured to be practically identical to Civilization I or II, so if
   the rules of a game are patentable, and those of the said games are
   patented, then Freeciv may infringe on that patent, but we don't
   believe this to be the case.

   Incidentally, there are good reasons to assume that Freeciv doesn't
   harm the sales of any of the commercial Civilization games in any way.

-------

2.2 How do I wake up in the morning?

   We're open to suggestions on this one.

   You can try to give Freeciv to your boss. There is no guarantee, but he
   may wake up later than you. Remind yourself that if you run into him at
   Civilization Anonymous, it's time to change jobs.

-------

2.3 Where can I ask questions or send improvements?

   Please ask questions about the game, its installation, or the rest of
   this site at the Freeciv Forums.

   Patches and bug reports are best reported to the Freeciv bug tracking
   system at http://gna.org/bugs/?group=freeciv.

   Copies of submissions to the bug tracker at gna.org are automatically
   sent to the development mailing list, with a bug ID in the subject.
   Please use the bug tracker web interface for replies.

-------

3 Technical Stuff

-------

3.1 I've found a bug, what should I do ?

   See the article on Bug Reporting.

-------

3.2 I've started a server but the client cannot find it!

   By default, your server will be available on host localhost (your own
   machine), port 5556; these are the default values your client uses when
   asking which game you want to connect to.

   So if you don't get a connection with these values, your server isn't
   running, or you used -p to start it on a different port, or your
   system's network configuration is broken.

   To start your local server, go to /usr/local/bin/ and run
   freeciv-server. Then type start to begin!
mike@localhost:/usr/local/bin$ ./freeciv-server
This is the server for Freeciv version 2.2.3
You can learn a lot about Freeciv at http://www.freeciv.org/
2: Loading rulesets
2: AI*1 has been added as Easy level AI-controlled player.
2: AI*2 has been added as Easy level AI-controlled player.
2: AI*3 has been added as Easy level AI-controlled player.
2: AI*4 has been added as Easy level AI-controlled player.
2: AI*5 has been added as Easy level AI-controlled player.
2: Now accepting new client connections.

> start
Starting game.

   If the server is not running, you will NOT be able to connect to your
   local server.

   If you can't connect to any of the other games listed, e.g. those on
   metaserver, a firewall in your organisation/ISP is probably blocking
   the connection.

   If you are running a personal firewall, make sure that you allow
   communication for freeciv-server and the Freeciv client to the trusted
   zone. If you want to allow others to play on your server, allow
   freeciv-server to act as a server on the Internet zone.

-------

3.3 I can play on my own server, but the metaserver doesn't seem to work.

   If your Metaserver tab turns up an empty list, there might something
   wrong with your setup.

   First, check your Freeciv version. Freeciv 1.9.0 up to and including
   1.14.2 use the old metaserver, 2.0 and higher use the new metaserver;
   if you're mixing versions, you may be getting the wrong list.

   If you can view the metaserver page with your web browser, and servers
   are listed, but the client's Metaserver tab still fails to list them,
   you may be behind a non-transparent proxy. See article on proxy
   settings for a detailed explanation.

-------

3.4 How do I change the metaserver info string?

   Use the /metamessage command. See /help metamessage.

-------

3.5 Am I using the latest version? Do I need to upgrade?

   The current stable Freeciv version is 2.2.3. For an overview of changes
   that went into this release, see the NEWS-2.2.3 article.

   The NEWS-#.#.# article is only updated for a new release; updates to
   Subversion are listed in the freeciv-commits archives (see Mailing
   Lists) and the actual code changes can be reviewed using our online
   source code browser.

   If you decide to upgrade, see the Download page for source code or
   contributed binaries.

   It's unlikely that all precompiled binaries and ports have been updated
   to 2.2.3 yet. If you can contribute, please do! Prepare a package and
   announce it to freeciv-dev@gna.org.

   Clients and servers of different versions are often incompatible due to
   changes in the client/server protocol. You will see incompatibilities
   as a 'mismatching capabilities' error. For example, 2.0.0 and 2.0.8 are
   compatible; 2.0.0 and 2.2.3 are not.

-------

3.6 "cannot open display :0"

   The Freeciv client is unable to open a window on your local X display.
   Are you running an X server at all? Maybe you need to install and run
   one, or switch to a Freeciv client that doesn't need X; see the
   previous question.

   Under Mac OS X, try starting the Freeciv client from the xterm session
   running under X.

-------

3.7 HOME directory not set?

   The Freeciv client wants to write a configuration file named
   .freeciv-client-rc-2.2 (for Freeciv 2.2.x) in your $HOME directory. On
   Windows XP $HOME is usually "C:\Documents and
   Settings\username\Application Data" On Windows 7 it can be found under
   "C:\Users\username\AppData\Roaming".The $HOME directory can be set from
   the DOS prompt or a .bat file, for example:
set home=C:\freeciv

   To set the environment variable permanently, right-click This Computer,
   select Properties and find the proper dialog.

   You can still play if this error message appears, but your client
   options won't be saved.

-------

3.8 How do I start the next game?

   A running Freeciv server can only run a single game. Once the game has
   been started with the /start command, restarting is impossible.

   To start a new game, /quit the server and start a new one, then
   reconnect the client to it.

-------

3.9 How do I restart a saved game?

   If for some reason you can't use the start-screen interface for loading
   a game, you can load one directly through the server command line (see
   Command-line_options). You can start freeciv-server with the -f option,
   for example:
freeciv-server -f freeciv-T0175-Y01250-auto.sav.bz2

   Or you can use the /load command inside the server before starting the
   game.

-------

3.10 The server cannot save games!

   In a local game the games will be saved into the default Freeciv save
   directory (typically ~/.freeciv/saves/). If you are running the server
   from the command line, however, any savegames will be stored in the
   current directory. If the saveturns server variable is set, the server
   will periodically save the game automatically (which can take a lot of
   disk space in some cases). In any case, you should check the ownership,
   permissions, and disk space/quota for the directory or partition you're
   trying to save to.

-------

3.11 Where are the save games located by default?

   On Unix like system, it will be in ~/.freeciv/saves On Windows XP, it
   will be in $HOME\.freeciv\saves where $HOME is usually "C:\Documents
   and Settings\username\Application Data" On Windows 7 it can be found
   under "C:\Users\username\AppData\Roaming"

   You could change this by setting the HOME environment variable, or
   using the --saves command line argument to the server (you would have
   to run it separately).

-------

3.12 Why are some of the menus in the Freeciv client disabled?

   Menus that cannot be used will be disabled. This means some menus are
   disabled during pregame, or unless you select a unit, or if the game
   has ended.

   It's also possible that you're not connected to a game server at all.
   If you start the client it should allow you to create a new game
   automatically (by pressing the Start New Game button). You may also try
   running the server from the command line (as freeciv-server) then
   connecting to it manually with the client (connect to localhost). Use
   the /start command to begin the game once you have connected. The
   server will now load some configuration files that some of the menus
   depend on.

-------

3.13 How do I find out about the available units, improvements, terrain types, and
technologies?

   There is extensive help on this in the Help menu, but only once the
   game has been started - this is because all of these things are
   configurable up to that point; see also section on Why are some of the
   menus in the Freeciv client disabled? above. (Some work needs to be
   done to make this more intuitive.)

   The game comes shipped with an interactive tutorial scenario. To run
   it, select Start Scenario Game from the main menu, then load the
   tutorial scenario.

   Outside the Freeciv client, we have some online tutorials in the Docs
   section of the wiki. A graph of the (default) technology tree is
   available on the wiki.

-------

3.14 My diagonal arrow keys do not work on Solaris.

   Why exactly, I don't know, but you have to xmodmap a few keys around.
   From my .xinitrc:
xmodmap -e 'keycode 27 = Up' \
        -e 'keycode 31 = Left' \
        -e 'keycode 34 = Down' \
        -e 'keycode 35 = Right' \
        -e 'keycode 76 = Up' \
        -e 'keycode 98 = Left' \
        -e 'keycode 120 = Down' \
        -e 'keycode 100 = Right'

-------

3.15 The client complains it can't read the .freeciv-client-rc-x.x file.

   This is harmless: the file will be created to store your client
   options, as soon as you save them; but it isn't supplied initially.

-------

3.16 My Freeciv client dumps core when I start it!

   Read on if you are using the Xaw client under certain Linux
   distributions or IRIX.

   In all likelihood, the problem is an enhanced version of the Xaw
   library, (Xaw3d, Xaw95,or neXtaw). A Freeciv binary compiled against
   the 'plain' Xaw library will segfault upon startup when used with
   these.

   Remedies:
     * Freeciv can be recompiled to use Xaw3d, if you have it: use

configure --with-xaw3d
     * Make sure the libXaw.so Freeciv is seeing is an unenhanced version
       (by installing the appropriate package, pointing to the right
       version using environment variables, or whatever; details depend on
       platform)
     * If for some reason you can't, but there is a 'plain' libXaw.a
       somewhere: hunt through the Makefiles and change lines which
       contain -lXaw to /usr/X11/lib/libXaw.a, or wherever libXaw.a is
       stored on your machine, then recompile (this was suggested by <dva
       AT uu.gatech.edu>
     * Install GTK+ (if not installed already), compile and use the GTK+
       client instead of the Xaw one.

   This problem used to be documented in the SuSE Linux support database.

   If your SEGV at startup is due to a different problem, please report it
   to the developers' bug reporting system.

-------

3.17 Freeciv fails to compile due to the Xaw libraries.

   As reported with Debian 2.1:
> make[2]: Entering directory `/usr/src/freeciv/client'
> Making all in gui-xaw
> make[3]: Entering directory `/usr/src/freeciv/client/gui-xaw'
> gcc -DHAVE_CONFIG_H -I. -I. -I../.. -I. -I./.. -I./../include
> -I../../common -I../../intl  -I/usr/X11R6/include    -g -O2 -Wall -c
> pixcomm.c
> In file included from pixcomm.c:54:
> pixcommp.h:54: X11/Xaw3d/CommandP.h: No such file or directory
> make[3]: *** [pixcomm.o] Error 1
[...]

   This is, again, an Xaw/Xaw3d confusion problem. In this particular
   case, the Debian xaw3dg package is not installed on the system.

   To select plain Xaw or Xaw3d explicitly, use:
./configure --with-xaw [...]
./configure --with-xaw3d [...]

-------

3.18 How do I compile Freeciv under Solaris?

   Solaris (2.5 and up) has its own version of X in /usr/openwin, its own
   version of make in /usr/ccs/bin/make, and its own compiler (to be
   purchased separately) which, if you have it, is available in
   /opt/SUNWspro/bin. Solaris does not provide the XPM library, which is
   required for the Xaw client; it doesn't provide any of the stuff
   required for imlib, gdk and gtk, either, which is required to build the
   GTK+ client. (This stuff can be compiled however, and is now more
   readily installable with the Ximian GNOME distribution.)

   To confuse matters further, many local systems administrators add MIT X
   (usually, in /usr/X11), GNU make, and the gcc compiler. If you're
   unlucky, the
./configure && make

   procedure will get confused about these different versions of tools.

   However, with some patience, everything can be compiled without
   problems. Details are provided in the Freeciv INSTALL document.

-------

3.19 How do I compile Freeciv under Solaris or FreeBSD?

   On Solaris, FreeBSD, and some other systems, the default make isn't GNU
   make. In order to compile you must either
./configure --disable-auto-deps --disable-nls

   in order to disable the GNU make specific parts of the Makefile, or
   simply use GNU make.

-------

3.20 I hate isometric view! How do I play with Civilization I style graphics?

   Start the client as
freeciv-gtk2 --tiles trident

   for the gtk2 client.

   There is also a client option in the Local Client sub-menu under
   Options (gtk2 client) or Local Settings (xaw client) menu.

-------

3.21 What other GUI options do I have for the Freeciv client?

   The look and feel of your GUI is mainly determined by the Freeciv
   client you use.

   The original client is based on the Athena widget set (Xaw), which is
   fast and very widely available, but many users find it old-fashioned.
   The client can also be compiled to use Xaw3d. New features are
   sometimes implemented in the GTK+ 2 version only, but the Xaw one still
   has a speed advantage.

   Both xaw and gtk clients compile and run on any Unix variant we are
   aware of, not just the ones for which our download section provides
   native installation support.

   For Amiga and MS Windows, clients exist that use the native windowing
   system rather than X11. Neither of them are actively maintained any
   longer, however.

   Some details of the GUI can be configured from the running client.

   A larger impact is made by the tileset used to display terrain, cities,
   units, etcetera. A tileset can be specified when the client is started
   up.

   Other tilesets in both categories are separately available from our
   download page.

   We do not distribute commercial Civilization™ game tiles for obvious
   copyright reasons.

-------

3.22 How do I enable/disable sound support?

   The client can be started without sound by supplying the commandline
   arguments: -P none

   Further instructions are in ./doc/README.sound in the source tarball.

   Please note that the stdsounds are extracted to data/stdsounds with
   soundspec file data/stdsounds.soundspec. For a system-wide installation
   you can extract that into /usr/local/share/freeciv, such that a
   directory /usr/local/share/freeciv/data/stdsounds will exist.

   You can then start the (gtk2) client as follows:
freeciv-gtk2 -P <plugin> -S stdsounds

   If that does not work, try:
freeciv-gtk2 -d 3 -P <plugin> -S stdsounds

   This will help you get some debug information (e.g. why the sound does
   not work).

-------

3.23 Where can I find more information on the *.ruleset files?

   There is some documentation in the ./doc/ directory, such as
   ./doc/README.effects. The default ruleset also has a minimal
   explanation of what all the fields mean, so default/buildings.ruleset
   would for instance list the meaning of the fields in the
   buildings.ruleset. Also of interest might be the rulesets page on
   freeciv.org; currently it contains little in the way of documentation
   but you may help change this by contributing some.

-------

3.24 How can I add additional civilizations in the nation/ subdirectory, or add
cities to the list for an existing nation?

   See the Nations article or ./doc/README.nations in the source tarball.

-------

3.25 How do I change the font?

   For the GTK+ 2.0 client, you can specify fonts in
   $HOME/.freeciv.rc-2.0, which can be copied from the freeciv.rc-2.0 that
   comes with Freeciv and edited with a text editor. Use Pango font names
   such as displayed by a tool like then Gnome Font Preferences.

   For example,
style "help_text"
{
font_name = "Monospace 9"
}

   For the Xaw client, you can change the font with X resources. You can
   specify them on the command line with the -xrm command-line option, or
   put them in your .Xdefaults file or the Freeciv app-defaults file.

   To change the main font, try something like:
freeciv-xaw -- -xrm "Freeciv*.font: 8x16"

   If the font isn't fixed width, some on the dialogs won't look right,
   but they'll still work.

   Note that on Microsoft Windows systems the $HOME environment variable
   usually isn't set by default, so you have to set it. In that case,
   create a directory for Freeciv settings somewhere (an obvious place
   would be
C:\Documents And Settings\(your username goes here)\Application Data

   ), then open a command shell and typing something like:
set HOME="C:\Documents And Settings\(your username goes here)\Application Data"

   If $HOME is already in use by other applications, just use that
   directory. Now copy the settings file to it as instructed above (note
   the . at the start of the resulting filename) and change some font
   settings ((e.g. replace Sans with Utopia here and there) and you should
   notice the effect. (See also this forum thread.)

-------

3.26 I am having problems with accented characters. What gives?

   The problem is that Freeciv (the server or client) simply cannot
   display the characters properly in the character encoding it is set to
   use. This is particularly a problem in older clients like the XAW
   client.
     * In the server, this can be fixed by changing your locale to use
       UTF-8. Normally this is done by changing the $LANG environment
       variable (you can see your current $LANG with echo $LANG). A full
       explanation is beyond the scope of this document, but here are a
       few common examples. If your $LANG is empty, try setting it to
       en_US.UTF-8 (for US English). If it is ru_RU.KOI8-R, try setting it
       to ru_RU.UTF-8. Note that the $LANG of the server only affects
       terminal input and output of the server, and will not have any
       effect on client behavior.

     * In the XAW client, the problem occurrs for the exact same reason as
       in the server. The solution is the same: change your locale to use
       UTF-8. If this isn't possible you may improve things by installing
       GNU libiconv. GNU's iconv library has better transliteration
       support than the iconv that comes on most unix-like systems.

     * There is no fix available for the Win32 (windows native) client.
       However with transliteration there shouldn't be much problem.

     * The GTK+ 2 client should not have any character problems. If you do
       it is probably a font issue.

-------

3.27 How can i change the language of my client/server?

   On Linux, it may be possible to start the (gtk2) client in the
   following fashion (for US English):
LANG=en_US freeciv-gtk2

   For a server in another language start is with (for German):
LANG=de_DE freeciv-server

   On Windows create a simple batch file (e.g. freeciv.bat, in the same
   directory, where you have installed the package) and then run this file
   instead of freeciv-gtk2.exe or freeciv-sdl.exe (do not forget to change
   the target of all shortcuts pointing to this new file). The batch
   consists of 2 lines (example given for the gtk2 client):
set LANG=EN
freeciv-gtk2.exe

-------

3.28 How do I get the latest development code?

   A snapshot of the development code is made every day; simply retrieve
   the latest version with your browser.

   This is development code; it may contain new features, bugs, and
   incompatibilities with older versions.

   An alternative is to use Subversion (SVN) directly:
    1. Obtain and install SVN on your Unix machine. On modern
       distributions it is already there; look for the svn command. You
       can get SVN from Apache.org.
    2. Grab the source:

                $ svn co svn://svn.gna.org/svn/freeciv/trunk freeciv

   Once you're retrieved the source, to update it, cd into the freeciv
   directory and issue svn update.

   Another useful svn command is svn diff.

   This shows the changes between the version you have on disk and the
   current development code.

   See also How to Contribute to Freeciv development.

   If you'd like to know more about SVN, try here.

-------

3.29 How do I disable full screen mode?

   In the GTK2 client, go to View and select Full Screen. It may not take
   effect until the next time you start the client.

   In the SDL client, open the Options dialogue, select Video options,
   deselect the Fullscreen Mode check box and then select the resolution
   of your choice. The change will take effect immediately.

-------

3.30 What are the system requirements ?

-------

3.30.1 Memory

   In a typical game the server takes about 15MB of memory and the client
   needs about 25MB. These values may change with larger maps or tilesets.
   For a single player game you need to run both the client and the
   server.

-------

3.30.2 Processor

   We recommend at least a 100Mhz processor. If you find your game running
   too slow, these may be the reasons:
     * Too little memory
       Swapping memory pages on disc (virtual memory) is really slow. Look
       at the memory requirements above.
     * Large map
       Larger map doesn't necessary mean a more challenging or enjoyable
       game. You may try a smaller map.
     * Many AI players
       Again, having more players doesn't necessary mean a more
       challenging or enjoyable game.
     * City Governor (CMA)
       This is a really useful client side agent which helps you to
       organize our citizens. However, it consumes many CPU cycles.

-------

3.30.3 Graphic display

   The GTK2 client works well on 1024x800 or higher resolutions. On
   smaller screens you may want to enable the Arrange widgets for small
   displays option under Interface tab in local options.

-------

3.30.4 Network

   A 56Kb modem should be enough to play a typical online game. However,
   many players suggest that a large ping is a big disadvantage. Your ISP
   mustn't block ports 5556 - 5600, because these are the ports which
   pubserver's servers are run on.

-------

4 Windows

-------

4.1 How do I use Freeciv under MS Windows ?

   Precompiled binaries can be downloaded from www.freeciv.org.

   If you want to compile the source code yourself, you will need mingw or
   cygwin.

-------

4.2 Retrieving the Native Windows Freeciv

   The Native Windows packages come as self-extracting installers.

   Simply download and install one of the .EXE installers. There are two
   different packages available, one using the GTK+ 2.0 toolkit, and one
   using the SDL libraries. The GTK version requires Windows NT, 2000, XP
   or later.

-------

4.3 OK, I've downloaded and installed it, how do I run it?

   If you used one of the self installer versions then there's a program
   group with the name chosen at installation time (for example,
   Freeciv-2.2.3.) Just go to click on
   Start→Programs→Freeciv-2.2.3→Freeciv

   That's it! You should be up and running.

-------

4.4 I've started the Freeciv client, but don't know what to do next?

   The following steps should get you started:
    1. The Freeciv client will pop up and after a second you will be taken
       to the main menu.
    2. If you want to play against other humans (I think they're human
       anyway :-) then click on the Connect to Network Game button in the
       main menu. Then either type in the IP address of the server or
       select the Internet Metaserver tab to play on online public
       servers. Then select an available game and click the Connect
       button. (You may need to click the Update button to get the list of
       servers initially and to update it after a while.)
    3. If you want to play on your local machine against the AI (all other
       players are AI controlled) then click on the Start New Game button.
       Then select your difficulty level and the Total players (it
       includes yourself, so if you wanted to play against four AI
       players, you'd select 5).
    4. Click the Pick Nation button to choose your nation, leader name,
       sex, and city style.
    5. Click the Start button.

   That's it! Enjoy!

-------

4.5 How do I use a different tileset?

   The first thing to do is to download the tileset you want to use from
   Tilesets.

   Then you have to unpack the tileset into the DATA or root directory in
   your Freeciv directory (so if your Freeciv directory is
   C:\FREECIV-2.2.3, then you'd tell 7-Zip to extract to
   C:\FREECIV-2.2.3\DATA.) Make sure you tell your extraction program to
   extract into the subdirectories in the file.

   Once that's done you can start using the new tileset (FINALLY!) You
   have to pass an argument to the Freeciv client so the easiest way to do
   that is to open a Command Prompt (from
   Start→Programs→Accessories→Command Prompt in my case, sometimes called
   an MS-DOS Window). Change to the Freeciv directory (for example, cd
   \FREECIV-2.2.3) and start the client with the --tiles tilesetname
   option. For example for the gtk2 client,
FREECIV-GTK2 --tiles freeland

   You should be good to go then!

-------

4.6 How do I use a different ruleset?

   A different ruleset can be used by downloading the ruleset and
   extracting it in the Freeciv root or data directory
   (C:\FREECIV-2.2.3\DATA, for example). This should create a subdirectory
   with the ruleset name (ancients, for example.)

   Then you need to tell the server to use it. This is done by typing
/rulesetdir ''ruleset directory''

   in the chat line of the client before pressing the Start Game button.

-------

4.7 I opened a ruleset file in Notepad and it is very hard to read

   The ruleset files (and other configuration files) are stored with UNIX
   line endings which Notepad doesn't handle correctly. Please an
   alternative editor like notepad2 or notepad++ instead.

-------

5 Mac OS X

-------

5.1 How do I install the latest version of Freeciv or compile it myself?

     * See the Install-MacOSX article.

-------

5.2 Where is the data directory?

   ~/.freeciv

-------

5.3 How do I install X11?

   X11 is an application, part of OS X provided by Apple, but not
   installed by default.

   If you have 10.4 "Tiger":
     * Find your Tiger install disc and insert it
     * Open the "Optional installs.mpkg" from the CD
     * Select Applications > X11 in the installer
     * OR
     * Visit this website and download the installer.

   If you have 10.3 "Panther":
     * Download the X11User.pkg installer from Apple
     * Open the file and install

-------

5.4 How do I troubleshoot Freeciv crashes?

   Freeciv writes some information to the system log if crashes. To see
   this, open /Applications/Utilities/Console.app immediately after a
   crash. Freeciv-related stuff should appear in the bottom.

-------

5.5 Freeciv crashes because it doesn't find libXinerama something?

   This bug could appear in 10.3 or incomplete X11 installations. To fix
   it requires either reinstallation of X11 (see above), or some knowledge
   of OS X internals.

   I found this fix:
    1. Download the Xbin.tgz distro from
       http://ftp.xfree86.org/pub/XFree86/4.5.0/binaries/Darwin-ppc-5.x/
    2. Unpack it and locate libXinerama.1.0.dylib in the lib directory
    3. Put libXinerama.1.0.dylib in /usr/X11R6/lib
    4. Symlink libXinerama.1.0.dylib to libXinerama.dylib and to
       libXinerama.1.dylib in that directory

-------

5.6 How do I install new tilesets?

   First, the Linux way works fine on OS X (put tilesets in ~/.freeciv).

   There is also an OSX-specific solution (taken from the Freeciv Forums):
    1. Download your favorite tileset and unpack it.
    2. Right (or ctrl) click on the client executable and select Show
       Package Contents from the context menu.
    3. Go to this directory:
       Contents/Resources/freeciv-x.y.z/share/freeciv
    4. Put the *.tileset file and corresponding folder into this
       directory.
    5. Start the client and the new tileset should show up in the Local
       Options dialog.

   Note: Not just tilesets, but other data like scenarios should also be
   installed in the same location.

-------

5.7 How do I scroll the map?

   To recenter the view, you can right-click either on the overview or the
   large map (the playfield). To simulate a right click on a single-button
   mouse, hold the command key (apple symbol key) while clicking. You can
   also try scrolling the map using two fingers on the trackpad while the
   view window is active.

-------

5.8 Freeciv won't start on my machine

   There can be many reasons for this. Here are a few tips:
     * You need Apple X11 installed to run the official release. Install
       from your system DVD/CDs (10.4 Tiger or later) or download and
       install from Apple's developer website (10.3 Panther).

     * Freeciv may not start if you are logged in as Admin. Log in as a
       Standard user and try again.

     * Official releases later than 2.0.3 are built to run on OS X Tiger
       or later and won't start on earlier versions of OS X.

